
===== PAGE 1 =====
Article
Hierarchical computation of 3D motion across
macaque areas MT and FST
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Retinal motion is transformed into 3D motion across an MT-
to-FST hierarchy
d Selective integration of MT responses explains the 3D
selectivity of FST neurons
d This hierarchical transformation generalizes the decoding of
3D motion
d Neuronal activity in FST accounts for behavioral sensitivity to
3D motion
Authors
Lowell W. Thompson, Byounghoon Kim,
Bas Rokers, Ari Rosenberg
Correspondence
ari.rosenberg@wisc.edu
In brief
Thompson et al. investigate how 2D
retinal-motion signals are hierarchically
transformed into representations of 3D
motion across the macaque visual cortex.
The results show that integrating the
output of 2D retinal-motion selective MT
neurons can produce behaviorally
relevant 3D motion representations in
FST.
Thompson et al., 2023, Cell Reports 42, 113524
December 26, 2023 ª 2023 The Author(s).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113524 ll

===== PAGE 2 =====
Article
Hierarchical computation of 3D motion
across macaque areas MT and FST
Lowell W. Thompson, 1,3 Byounghoon Kim,1 Bas Rokers,2 and Ari Rosenberg 1,4,*
1Department of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA
2Department of Psychology, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
3Present address: Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
4Lead contact
*Correspondence: ari.rosenberg@wisc.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113524
SUMMARY
Computing behaviorally relevant representations of three-dimensional (3D) motion from two-dimensional
(2D) retinal signals is critical for survival. To ascertain where and how the primate visual system performs
this computation, we recorded from the macaque middle temporal (MT) area and its downstream target,
the fundus of the superior temporal sulcus (area FST). Area MT is a key site of 2D motion processing, but
its role in 3D motion processing is controversial. The functions of FST remain highly underexplored. To distin-
guish representations of 3D motion from those of 2D retinal motion, we contrast responses to multiple motion
cues during a motion discrimination task. The results reveal a hierarchical transformation whereby many FST
but not MT neurons are selective for 3D motion. Modeling results further show how generalized, cue-invariant
representations of 3D motion in FST may be created by selectively integrating the output of 2D motion selec-
tive MT neurons.
INTRODUCTION
The neural computation of three-dimensional (3D) motion is
essential for functions such as capturing prey or avoiding pred-
ators. Although 3D visual processing shaped the evolution of the
primate brain,
1 current understanding of 3D motion processing
remains surprisingly limited compared with that of two-dimen-
sional (2D) retinal-motion processing. 2–4 In part, this reﬂects
that distinct cues signal 2D versus 3D motion, with 3D motion
computations depending critically on the relationship between
retinal-motion signals sensed by the two eyes. 5–8
The inherent covariation of an object’s motion in the world and
the corresponding retinal projections makes dissociating 3D
from 2D representations challenging. The macaque middle tem-
poral (MT) area fundamentally contributes to the processing of
2D retinal motion.
9 Some early studies implicated MT in the pro-
cessing of 3D motion, 10,11 but other work suggested that the
apparent 3D selectivity was explained by lower-level selectivity
for 2D motion, speed, and horizontal disparity.
12 Subsequent
studies supported the possibility of selectivity for stereoscopi-
cally deﬁned 3D motion in MT, 13,14 whereas other work isolated
that selectivity to the neighboring fundus of the superior tempo-
ral sulcus (area FST). 15 Thus, the site of 3D-motion processing
and the speciﬁc role of MT remains controversial.
Computational work has further suggested that the interaction
of 2D direction selectivity and ocular dominance (OD) in MT may
form the basis of a ‘‘non-canonical’’ mechanism for encoding
and decoding 3D motion.
16,17 However, the ability to decode infor-
mation from a population of neurons does not imply that those neu-
rons explicitly represent that information. For instance, the infor-
mation required to decode facial expression is present in the
primary visual cortex (V1),18 but V1 neurons do not represent facial
expression. Indeed, 2D direction selectivity and OD are common
properties of early visual system neurons. If these criteria were suf-
ﬁcient to deﬁne 3D motion selectivity, then 2D direction selective
retinal ganglion cells would also need to be classiﬁed as 3D selec-
tive. These observations suggest that more stringent criteria are
required to deﬁne 3D motion selectivity.
To clarify the contributions of MT and FST to motion process-
ing, we contrasted neuronal responses to a set of stimuli de-
signed to unambiguously distinguish 3D from 2D selectivity.
8
For the vast majority of MT neurons, apparent 3D direction pref-
erences switched depending on which eye viewed the stimuli.
When both eyes saw the stimuli, the responses typically followed
those of the dominant eye. These ﬁndings were readily explained
by a combination of 2D direction selectivity and OD. In contrast,
the 3D direction preferences of FST neurons were often indepen-
dent of which eye saw the stimulus and the class of motion cue.
Moreover, the sensitivity of 3D motion selective FST neurons
predicted the behavioral sensitivity of the monkeys in a toward
or away object motion discrimination task. Modeling results
further showed how generalized, cue-invariant 3D motion selec-
tivity could be achieved by selectively integrating the output of
2D retinal-motion selective neurons. The ﬁndings collectively
reveal that MT is largely specialized for processing 2D retinal mo-
tion whereas FST contains a prominent representation of 3D mo-
tion, and show how behaviorally relevant motion representations
can be computed from ambiguous retinal signals.
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 ª 2023 The Author(s). 1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 3 =====
RESULTS
Differentiating 3D from 2D motion selectivity
Distinguishing genuine 3D motion selectivity from 2D retinal-mo-
tion selectivity is challenging because the two signals neces-
sarily covary. To this end, we developed a set of 3D motion stim-
uli consisting of dots that moved toward or away from the
monkey’s ‘‘cyclopean eye’’ (the midpoint between the two
eyes) within a spatially conﬁned volume
6–8 (STAR Methods; Fig-
ure 1A). In contrast to previous studies that assessed 3D motion
selectivity in anesthetized or passively ﬁxating monkeys, 10,12–14
we measured neuronal responses to these stimuli as the mon-
keys performed a toward or away motion discrimination task in
which motion coherence was varied ( Figure 1 B). On each trial,
the direction of motion was reported as either ‘‘toward’’ or
‘‘away.’’ The stimulus set included four conditions across which
different visual cues signaled the direction of 3D motion: distinct
left-eye and right-eye perspective cues (optic ﬂow/looming), ste-
reoscopic cues, and all cues combined (combined-cues)
(Figure 1C).
For motion toward or away from the cyclopean eye, projective
geometry maximizes the velocity differences between the left-
and the right-eye retinal signals, such that the net 2D retinal mo-
tions are equal and opposite in the two eyes. Leveraging this
geometric property, we compared neuronal responses across
the four cue conditions to distinguish 2D retinal-motion selec-
tivity ( Figure 1 D) from 3D motion selectivity ( Figure 1 E), as the
following example illustrates. Consider a neuron that responds
more strongly to toward than to away motion in the combined-
cue and stereoscopic cue conditions (i.e., binocular viewing con-
ditions), as measured in previous studies.
13,14 These responses
could reﬂect either: (1) genuine 3D motion selectivity or (2) a
combination of 2D retinal-motion selectivity and OD. In partic-
ular, a 2D selective neuron with OD will preferentially respond
to 3D motion that results in the dominant eye seeing the
preferred 2D motion. In this example, a rightward motion selec-
tive neuron with left-eye OD will respond best to toward motion
during binocular viewing ( Figure 1 D). Thus, responses to com-
bined-cue and/or stereoscopic cue stimuli alone cannot distin-
guish 3D from 2D motion selectivity.
These alternatives can instead be distinguished by also
considering responses to left- and right-eye perspective cues
(i.e., monocular viewing conditions). Most notably, for 2D selec-
tive neurons, apparent 3D motion preferences will be opposite
for these conditions (Figure 1D). In addition, for 2D selective neu-
rons with strong OD, responses to combined-cue and stereo-
scopic cue stimuli will positively (negatively) correlate with the
dominant (non-dominant) eye’s perspective cue responses.
For those with weak OD, responses to the binocular conditions
will show little-to-no preference for either toward or away mo-
tion. In stark contrast, the preferences of 3D selective neurons
will be cue invariant ( Figure 1 E). These predictions provide
rigorous criteria for classifying neurons as selective for 2D retinal
motion or 3D motion.
Localization of MT and FST
To investigate the hierarchical transformation of visual motion,
we recorded from 358 MT (monkey J, n = 193; monkey C, n =
165) and 534 FST (monkey J, n = 317; monkey C, n = 217) neu-
rons in two male rhesus macaques using laminar array probes
with either four or eight tetrodes ( Figure 2A). While the functional
and anatomical organization of MT is well documented,
9 little is
known about FST. We therefore ﬁrst identiﬁed MT, where recep-
tive ﬁelds (RFs) are organized along a peripheral-to-foveal visual
ﬁeld representation moving anterior to posterior
19 (Figure 2 B,
left). We then localized FST, which is anteroventral to MT. At
the boundary, RFs became larger and showed a coarse reversal
in retinotopy. Moving farther anterior, they increased in size with
substantial variability
20–22 (Figure 2 B, right). We also observed
that RF size increased more slowly as a function of eccentricity
in MT (type II regression slope = 0.82) than FST (slope = 1.15),
as indicated by a linear mixed-effects model, which showed a
signiﬁcant interaction between area and eccentricity (monkey
as a random effect, p = 4.80 3 10
/C0 4). Importantly, the eccentric-
ities at which the stimuli were presented did not signiﬁcantly
differ for the two areas (Wilcoxon rank sum, p = 0.17). The areas
Figure 1. Three-dimensional-motion stimuli,
discrimination task, and predictions
(A) The stimulus was a 3D volume with dots that
moved toward (cyan arrow) or away (orange arrow)
from the monkey’s cyclopean eye.
(B) On each trial, the monkey ﬁxated for 300 ms
before a 3D motion stimulus appeared for 1 s.
The perceived direction of motion was indicated
by a downward (‘‘toward’’) or upward (‘‘away’’)
saccade. Stimuli were always presented within the
neuron’s receptive ﬁeld (RF).
(C) Screen-projected vector ﬁelds depicting
the left- and right-eye signals for each cue con-
dition (combined, black; left-eye perspective,
blue; right-eye perspective, green; stereoscopic,
magenta). Note that the 3D motion stimuli pro-
duced opposite net 2D retinal motions in the two
eyes.
(D) Predicted responses for 2D retinal-motion selective neurons. Left- and right-eye perspective cue responses are negatively correlated. Combin ed-cue and
stereoscopic cue responses follow the dominant eye responses.
(E) Predicted responses for 3D motion selective neurons. Preferences are the same across cue conditions.
2 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 4 =====
were further distinguished by their visual response latencies,
which were signiﬁcantly shorter in MT (median = 55 ms) than in
FST (median = 64 ms; Wilcoxon rank sum, p = 4.19 3 10/C0 40; Fig-
ure 2C). There was not a difference, however, in whether the neu-
rons preferred 2D motion presented at a slower (4.2 /C14 /s) or faster
(12.6/C14 /s) speed. For neurons tested at both speeds, the propor-
tions that preferred the slow speed were similar in the two areas
(MT, 24%, n = 40/165; FST, 31%, n = 162/523) and not signiﬁ-
cantly different (chi-squared test, p = 0.10). Last, differences in
saccade-related activity during an overlap saccade task also
distinguished the areas ( Figure S1 A; STAR Methods ). In MT,
only a small proportion of neurons showed increases in activity
leading up to the saccade (n = 35/358, 10%; Figure S1 B). The
prevalence of saccade-related activity in FST was nearly double
that in MT (n = 98/534, 18%) and the modulation was more pro-
nounced ( Figure S1 C). Thus, multiple physiological properties
distinguished the areas and provide systematic criteria for local-
izing FST.
MT and FST respond differently to 3D motion
To identify neurons that were putatively selective for 3D motion,
we performed two-way ANOVAs over motion direction and
coherence on the responses to the combined-cue stimuli, which
include all of the 3D-motion cues and elicit the most precise es-
timates of 3D motion
8 (Figure 1 C). The proportions of neurons
with statistically signiﬁcant tuning (p < 0.05 for the main effect
of direction) were similar in MT (54%, n = 194/358) and FST
(58%, n = 309/534) and aligned well with previous reports of to-
ward and away selectivity in MT.
13,14 We additionally quantiﬁed
the strength of toward and away selectivity using an asymmetry
index (AI) that compared responses to toward versus away mo-
tion across coherences for each neuron and cue condition
(STAR Methods). The AI was previously used to quantify 3D mo-
tion selectivity in MT,
14 with positive values indicating a toward
preference and negative values indicating an away preference.
Based on the combined-cue AIs, a larger proportion of tuned
neurons preferred toward rather than away motion (MT, 77%,
n = 149/194; FST, 69%, n = 213/309; chi-squared test, both
p < 2.82 3 10
/C0 11). This tendency was also observed in most of
the isolated cue conditions (Figure S2) and may reﬂect the impor-
tance of detecting objects moving directly toward the head (see
discussion). All subsequent analyses were performed using neu-
rons with signiﬁcant tuning in the combined-cue condition to test
if that tuning reﬂected genuine 3D motion selectivity or lower-
level 2D retinal-motion selectivity.
Although a large proportion of neurons showed signiﬁcant
selectivity in the combined-cue condition, such responses are
insufﬁcient to distinguish 3D motion selectivity from 2D retinal-mo-
tion selectivity (Figures 1D and 1E). Instead, comparisons must be
made across cue conditions. Example responses to each of the
four cue conditions are shown for four MT neurons in
Figures 3A–3D and four FST neurons in Figures 3E–3H. Following
the 2D retinal-motion predictions, most MT neurons (Figures 3A–
3C) had: (1) negatively correlated left- and right-eye perspective
cue responses and (2) combined-cue and stereoscopic cue re-
sponses that followed the dominant eye’s perspective cue re-
sponses. A few MT neurons had responses that followed the 3D
motion predictions ( Figure 3 D). In contrast, many FST neurons
(Figures 3E–3G) had cue-invariant direction preferences, as pre-
dicted for 3D motion selectivity. The responses of other FST neu-
rons followed the 2D motion predictions (Figure 3H). To test if 2D
retinal-motion signals are transformed into a representation of
3D motion across an MT-to-FST hierarchy, the next section quan-
tiﬁes the prevalence of 2D and 3D selectivity in each area.
Prevalent 3D-motion selectivity in FST but not MT
To determine the prevalence of 2D and 3D motion selectivity in
MT and FST, we classiﬁed the neurons based on their responses
to left- and right-eye perspective cues. For this analysis, neurons
were required to show statistically signiﬁcant tuning in
both perspective cue conditions (MT, 55%, n = 106/194; FST,
51%, n = 157/309). To classify the neurons, we computed
Z-transformed partial correlation coefﬁcients
23,24 based on the
predictions outlined in Figures 1 D and 1E ( STAR Methods ). For
each neuron, we ﬁrst computed the correlation between the
left- and right-eye perspective cue tuning curves aligned relative
to the direction of 3D motion (as in Figure 3). This 3D motion cor-
relation is positive for 3D selective neurons and negative for 2D
Figure 2. Localization of MT and FST
(A) Sagittal MRI sections from monkey J (left) and monkey C (right) showing MRI-based estimates of MT (orange), FST (purple), and the dorsal medial sup erior
temporal (MSTd) area (teal) for reference. Blue and green dots show approximate recording locations in MT and FST, respectively. Recording sites were projected
along the medial-lateral axis onto individual sections. A schematic of a laminar probe with four tetrodes and example spike waveforms is shown to the r ight.
(B) MT neurons (left) had smaller RFs, whose area increased at a slower rate with eccentricity compared with FST neurons (right). Type II regression li nes (solid
black) and identity lines (dashed black) are shown for reference. Points are colored according to the anterior-posterior (A-P) location of the recor ding site
(normalized for each monkey). The representation of the visual ﬁeld in MT progressed from posterior (larger peripheral RFs; cyan) to anterior (small er foveal RFs;
magenta). A coarse reversal occurred in FST, where posterior RFs were more foveal (magenta) and anterior RFs were more peripheral (yellow).
(C) Distribution of visual response latencies in MT (orange) and FST (purple). See also Figure S1.
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 3
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 5 =====
selective neurons. We then aligned the tuning curves relative to
the net direction of 2D retinal motion (i.e., in 2D retinal coordi-
nates) by reﬂecting one of them about the 0% motion coherence
and computed a 2D retinal-motion correlation. This correlation is
negative for 3D selective neurons and positive for 2D selective
neurons. Last, we Z-transformed the 2D (Z
2D) and 3D (Z 3D) mo-
tion correlations, allowing for the statistical classiﬁcation of 2D
versus 3D motion selectivity ( Figure 4).
A majority of MT neurons were statistically classiﬁed as 2D
retinal-motion selective (n = 80/106; 75%), while a minority
were classiﬁed as 3D selective (n = 9/106; 8%). The predomi-
nance of 2D selectivity in MT was further evident in the distribu-
tion of classiﬁcations (Figure 4A, diagonal histogram), which had
no indication of having multiple modes (Hartigan’s dip test, p =
0.93). In stark contrast, the proportions of FST neurons that
were classiﬁed as 2D (n = 66/157; 42%) or 3D (n = 58/157;
37%) selective were quite similar. Moreover, the distribution of
classiﬁcations was bimodal (Hartigan’s dip test, p = 4.6 3
10
/C0 3), consistent with separate subpopulations of 2D and 3D se-
lective neurons. This possibility was further supported by distinct
time courses of Z
3D–Z2D (Figure S3). After controlling for area, we
found that 2D and 3D selective neurons had similar visual
response latencies (linear mixed-effects model predicting la-
tency from motion selectivity classiﬁcation, area, and their inter-
action with monkey as a random effect; classiﬁcation main ef-
fect, p = 0.81; area main effect, p = 7.68 3 10
/C0 8; interaction,
p = 0.49). At least within FST (note the limited statistical power
for MT), this may suggest that 2D motion and 3D motion are pro-
cessed in parallel. These analyses revealed a hierarchical trans-
formation from 2D to 3D motion selectivity between MT and FST
that is reminiscent of the transformation of component to pattern
motion selectivity between V1 and MT. 24
Our predictions further included that 2D retinal-motion selec-
tive neurons should have responses to binocular (combined-
cue and stereoscopic cue) 3D motion stimuli that positively asso-
ciate with the dominant eye’s perspective cue responses and
negatively associate with those of the non-dominant eye. Impor-
tantly, the strength of OD is expected to moderate this relation-
ship, such that it will be strongest for neurons with strong OD and
weakest for neurons with weak OD, since neither eye can be reli-
ably deﬁned as dominant. To test these predictions, we quanti-
ﬁed OD using a monocularity index ( STAR Methods ). We then
used logistic regression to determine if the combined-cue and
stereoscopic cue direction preferences (toward or away) of 2D
selective neurons were predicted by the dominant (or non-domi-
nant) eye perspective cue AI, log-transformed OD magnitude,
and their interaction (Figure S4, top row). As predicted, the com-
bined-cue preferences were positively associated with the domi-
nant eye perspective cue AIs (MT, b = 8.05, p = 1.7 3 10
/C0 4; FST,
b = 9.68, p = 2.6 3 10/C0 3), and the magnitude of the effect
increased with stronger OD in both MT (interaction, b = 1.43,
p = 8.3 3 10/C0 3) and FST (interaction, b = 2.43, p = 2.6 3 10/C0 3).
Importantly, the combined-cue preferences were negatively
associated with the non-dominant eye perspective cue AIs
(MT, b = /C0 8.67, p = 5.9 3 10/C0 5; FST, b = /C0 12.96, p = 1.3 3
10/C0 4), and the magnitude of the effect again increased with
stronger OD in both MT (interaction, b = /C0 1.69, p = 2.4 3
10/C0 3) and FST (interaction, b = /C0 3.41, p = 5.3 3 10/C0 4). For the
Figure 3. Example MT and FST responses to 3D motion
(A–C) Example MT neurons whose responses imply 2D retinal-motion selectivity (cf., Figure 1D). In (C), note that weak ocular dominance was associated with
attenuated combined-cue and stereoscopic cue peak responses, consistent with motion opponency. Asymmetry index (AI) values for each cue condition are
listed as insets.
(D) A rare MT neuron whose responses were consistent with 3D selectivity (cf., Figure 1E).
(E–G) Example FST neurons whose responses imply 3D motion selectivity.
(H) An FST neuron whose responses imply 2D retinal-motion selectivity. See also Figure S2.
4 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 6 =====
stereoscopic cue stimuli, the MT results were similar, such that
the stereoscopic cue preferences were positively associated
with the dominant eye perspective cue AIs ( b = 8.3, p = 3.3 3
10
/C0 3; interaction, b = 1.34, p = 0.06) and negatively associated
with the non-dominant eye perspective cue AIs ( b = /C0 9.43,
p = 1.6 3 10/C0 3; interaction, b = /C0 1.61, p = 0.028). For FST, the
stereoscopic cue results followed similar trends but were not sig-
niﬁcant for the dominant eye ( b = 2.55, p = 0.26; interaction, b =
0.21, p = 0.80) or non-dominant eye ( b = /C0 2.66, p = 0.26; inter-
action, b = /C0 0.22, p = 0.80), further distinguishing the two areas.
Last, for 3D selective neurons in both areas, the combined-cue
and stereoscopic cue AIs were positively associated with both
eyes’ perspective cue responses, as predicted ( Figure S4 , bot-
tom row). These results collectively imply that MT is largely
specialized for processing 2D retinal motion, whereas FST con-
tains a prominent representation of 3D motion.
No systematic relationship between 3D motion and
saccade direction selectivity
Having found greater prevalence of 3D motion selectivity as well
as saccade direction selectivity in FST than in MT, we consid-
ered if there was a connection between the two properties. We
ﬁrst observed that relatively few neurons with combined-cue
tuning also had saccade direction selectivity (MT, n = 21/194;
FST, n = 58/309). Second, for neurons with both combined-
cue tuning and saccade direction selectivity, the preferences
were congruent (e.g., toward motion and downward saccades)
with roughly the same frequency as they were opposite (MT,
n = 9/21; FST, n = 37/58 were congruent). Third, neurons with
congruent preferences were rarely classiﬁed as 3D selective
(MT, n = 0/9; FST, n = 5/37). Last, for all neurons with saccade
direction selectivity (MT, n = 35; FST, n = 98), we recomputed
the AI for each cue condition using a shorter analysis window
(750 ms) to remove potential saccade signals (Figure S1). The re-
computed AIs were nearly identical to those from the full 1 s win-
dow (Pearson correlation; MT, r R 0.98; FST, r R 0.97 across all
four cue conditions). These results collectively indicate that there
was no systematic relationship between 3D motion and saccade
direction selectivity.
Robust linear decoding of 3D motion from FST, but not
MT
We next assessed whether the hierarchical transformation of vi-
sual motion signals between MT and FST served to simplify the
decoding of 3D motion. Intuitively, the conjunction of select com-
binations of MT neuronal responses could be used to infer 3D mo-
tion. For example, toward motion can be inferred from the simul-
taneous activation of a leftward selective MT neuron with right OD
and a rightward selective MT neuron with left OD. However, this
would require the decoder to possess explicit knowledge of
utrocular (eye of origin) information. Indeed, previous work pro-
posed that MT is the site of 3D motion decoding through a non-
canonical mechanism that incorporated 2D motion selectivity
and OD.
16 However, the above ﬁndings suggest that hierarchical
computations performed across MT and FST might generalize,
and therefore simplify, the decoding of 3D motion. 25
To test this possibility and highlight the challenges of decoding
3D motion from MT, we trained linear decoders (Fisher’s linear
discriminant) to classify toward and away motion. Separate de-
coders were trained for MT and FST using the 2D and 3D motion
selective subpopulations. To relate our ﬁndings to previous
work, which emphasized the role of OD in 3D-motion process-
ing,
10,16,17,26 each neuron’s OD (monocularity index) was used
to reassign the perspective cue conditions as dominant and
non-dominant eye perspective cues. Training was performed us-
ing the combined-cue data and all motion coherences ( STAR
Methods), and we evaluated the performance of the decoders
across cue conditions and motion coherences.
We ﬁrst examined the MT results. For both the 2D ( Figure 5A,
top row) and the 3D ( Figure 5 A, bottom row) motion selective
neurons, the performance of the decoders was consistently
above chance and generally increased with motion coherence
for the combined- (black curve), stereoscopic- (magenta curve),
and dominant-eye-perspective- (yellow curve) cues. However, it
is essential to emphasize that this pattern would be expected
regardless of whether the neurons encoded 2D or 3D motion.
The critical results to consider are instead how the decoders per-
formed with the non-dominant eye perspective cues. For the 2D
selective MT neurons, this performance was consistently below
chance and became systematically worse with increasing mo-
tion coherence (cyan curve; Figure 5A, top row). This systematic
confusion of toward and away motion indicates that the decoder
extracted the net direction of 2D retinal motion. Even for the 3D
selective MT neurons, performance was near chance for the
non-dominant eye perspective cues (cyan curve; Figure 5A, bot-
tom row). These results imply that if 3D motion was decoded
from MT, then the decoding weights would need to dynamically
change to reﬂect whether the left eye, right eye, or both eyes
happened to be open; otherwise, opposite directions of 3D mo-
tion would be confused.
We next tested if FST could support generalized, cue-invariant
decoding of 3D motion based on a ﬁxed set of decoding weights.
Figure 4. Classiﬁcation of 2D and 3D motion selectivity based on
responses to eye-speciﬁc perspective cues
(A) Classiﬁcation of motion selectivity in MT. Statistical boundaries demarcate
regions deﬁning neurons as 2D retinal-motion selective (red region and points),
3D motion selective (blue region and points), or unclassiﬁed (white region with
black points). Most MT neurons were 2D retinal-motion selective. The diagonal
histogram shows the distribution of classiﬁcations.
(B) Same as (A), but for FST. Approximately equal proportions of FST neurons
were selective for 2D and 3D motion. Note the bimodal distribution of classi-
ﬁcations. See also Figures S3 and S4.
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 5
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 7 =====
Not surprisingly, the decoding of toward versus away motion
from 2D selective FST neurons was qualitatively similar to that
in MT. In particular, the direction of motion tended to be misclas-
siﬁed for the non-dominant eye perspective cues ( Figure 5B, top
row). However, when decoding from the 3D selective FST neu-
rons, performance was consistently above chance and generally
increased with coherence in each condition ( Figure 5 B, bottom
row). Most critically, performance was highly similar for the
dominant and non-dominant eye perspective cues, despite the
stimuli having equal and opposite net retinal motions. The ﬁnding
that cue-invariant decoding was most readily achieved with 3D
selective FST neurons was further highlighted by decoding re-
sults using the full neuronal populations ( Figure S5 ). These re-
sults thus substantiate that a hierarchical transformation of mo-
tion signals occurs across MT and FST and reveal that the
transformation generalizes decoding by allowing 3D motion to
be extracted using a single set of weights, regardless of the
deﬁning visual cues or which eye was open.
Last, reductions in decoding performance were apparent in
the stereoscopic cue condition at high coherences for the 3D se-
lective MT and both FST subpopulations. Similar effects were
observed in single-neuron responses ( Figure 3) and neurometric
analyses presented in the next section. These observations may
collectively reﬂect that FST neurons are often sensitive to more
complex retinal velocity patterns than 2D translations
27 and
that the 3D selective neurons in particular were sensitive to pat-
terns of optic ﬂow that naturally occur with 3D motion but which
were absent in the stereoscopic cue condition (see discussion).
3D selective neurons account for behavioral sensitivity
to 3D motion
The experiments additionally allowed for the direct comparison
of behavioral and neuronal sensitivity to 3D motion. To this
end, we quantiﬁed the monkeys’ behavioral sensitivity for each
cue condition by ﬁtting psychometric functions to the proportion
of toward reports at each motion coherence.
8 We similarly quan-
tiﬁed how well an ideal observer could discriminate toward from
away motion using single-neuron responses by calculating neu-
rometric sensitivities for each condition ( STAR Methods ).
28,29
Using these measures, we compared the behavioral sensitivities
to the neurometric sensitivities of 2Dand 3D selective neurons in
MT and FST.
Median psychometric functions across recording sessions
and neurometric functions across neurons are shown for each
cue condition in Figure 6 A. As expected from previous behav-
ioral studies,7,8 behavioral sensitivity in the combined-cue condi-
tion was greater than in any of the isolated cue conditions (linear
mixed-effects model predicting log-transformed sensitivities
with condition, eccentricity, and brain area as main effects and
monkey as a random effect; p = 1.3 3 10
/C0 65). Across the isolated
cue conditions, behavioral sensitivity to the two eyes’ perspec-
tive cues was relatively similar (analogous linear mixed-
effects model comparing left- and right-eye perspective cues;
p = 0.07), and the monkeys were somewhat more sensitive to
stereoscopic cues than perspective cues (analogous model
comparing stereoscopic cues with both perspective cues;
p = 5.3 3 10
/C0 5). There was no signiﬁcant effect of area (p R
0.48 for all models), indicating that behavioral performance
was similar across the MT and FST recording sessions. These
ﬁndings reﬂect the known perceptual integration of perspective
and stereoscopic cues to 3D motion.
The pattern of behavioral sensitivity across the four cue condi-
tions was markedly different from the neurometric sensitivities of
2D selective MT and FST neurons (Figure 6A, cf., column 1 to col-
umns 2 and 3). Most notably, neurometric sensitivities in the
perspective cue conditions (i.e., during monocular viewing) ex-
ceeded those in the combined-cue and stereoscopic cue condi-
tions (i.e., during binocular viewing; p % 2.2 3 10
/C0 13;l i n e a r
mixed-effects models predicting log-transformed sensitivities
with condition as a main effect and monkey as a random effect).
Indeed, on individual sessions, the behavioral and neurometric
sensitivities were typically negatively correlated across the four
cue conditions (MT, mean = /C0 0.33; FST, mean = /C0 0.14; both
means signiﬁcantly less than 0, t test, p% 0.021). Thus, the sensi-
tivities of 2D selective neurons did not account for the behavioral
performance of the monkeys ( Figure 6 B, ﬁrst two columns).
Instead, the lower neurometric sensitivities in the binocular viewing
conditions were consistent with 2D motion opponency
21,30–32 that
reduced the overall response modulation when the two eyes saw
opposite net 2D directions (e.g., see Figure 3C).
We next compared the behavioral sensitivities to the neuro-
metric sensitivities of the 3D selective neurons. Similar to the
monkeys, 3D selective neurons were most sensitive in the com-
bined-cue condition (linear mixed-effects models predicting log-
transformed sensitivities with condition as a main effect and
monkey as a random effect; MT, p = 0.035; FST, p = 3.9 3
10
/C0 7). Neurometric sensitivities in the two perspective cue
Figure 5. Linear decoding of 3D motion direction from MT and FST
(A) Decoding performance with 2D (top) and 3D (bottom) selective MT neurons
as a function of motion coherence. Decoders were trained on the combined-
cue responses and tested on the combined-cue (black), stereoscopic cue
(magenta), dominant eye perspective cue (yellow), and non-dominant eye
perspective cue (cyan) responses. Error bars are 95% conﬁdence intervals.
(B) Same as (A), but for FST. Generalized, cue-invariant decoding of 3D motion
was achieved only with 3D motion selective FST neurons. See also Figure S5.
6 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 8 =====
conditions were similar (analogous model comparing left- and
right-eye perspective cues; MT, p = 0.67; FST, p = 0.83). Sensi-
tivities to the perspective and stereoscopic cues were also
similar (analogous model comparing stereoscopic cues with
both perspective cues; MT, p = 0.95; FST, p = 0.42) ( Figure 6A,
columns 4 and 5). On individual sessions, the behavioral and
neurometric sensitivities were typically positively correlated
across the four cue conditions (MT, mean = 0.39; FST, mean =
0.39; both means signiﬁcantly greater than 0, t test, p % 0.011)
(Figure 6B, last two columns). In the stereoscopic cue condition,
3D selective FST neurons showed reductions in discriminability
at the highest coherences, consistent with the decoding results
(Figure 5 ). While a similar effect was not behaviorally apparent,
note that the behavior saturated at comparatively lower coher-
ences ( Figure 6 A, ﬁrst column), consistent with a ceiling effect
in the relationship between neuronal response amplitude and in-
ferred motion direction.
33,34 Overall, these results indicate that
the behavioral sensitivities were best explained by the responses
of 3D selective neurons and most strongly associated with FST
due to the cross-area difference in prevalence of 3D selectivity.
The pattern of neurometric sensitivities across the cue condi-
tions further distinguished 2D and 3D selective neurons. For 2D
selective neurons, larger sensitivities were associated with
monocular over binocular viewing conditions, consistent with
motion opponency (which is commonplace in V1 and MT
30,31
but perhaps less so in FST 21). In contrast, for 3D selective neu-
rons, larger sensitivities were associated with the presence of
multiple motion cues (as opposed to monocular versus binocular
viewing), which is consistent with the theoretical principles of
neuronal cue integration
33,35 and the perceptual integration of
3D motion cues. 7,8 To further explore these observations, we
ran linear mixed-effects models to test if the strength of 3D
versus 2D selectivity on a continuum (Z 3D–Z2D) was predictable
from the log-transformed neurometric sensitivity in each cue
condition, area, and their interaction. Consistent with 2D motion
opponency, stronger 2D selectivity was associated with greater
left- and right-eye perspective cue (i.e., monocular viewing) sen-
sitivities in both areas (sensitivity main effects, p % 3.5 3 10
/C0 4;
interactions, p R 0.12). The relationships were qualitatively
different for the combined- and stereoscopic cue conditions.
Stronger 3D selectivity was associated with greater combined-
cue sensitivity in both areas and the effect was much larger in
FST (b = 1.28) than in MT (b = 0.12) (interaction, p = 0.02), consis-
Figure 6. Behavioral and neuronal sensitivity
to 3D motion
(A) Median psychometric and neurometric curves
for each area (MT and FST) and subpopulation (2D
and 3D).
(B) Distributions of Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
comparing simultaneously measured behavioral
and neurometric sensitivities for each cue condi-
tion (arranged in columns following A).
tent with FST containing a more balanced
representation of 2D and 3D motion than
MT, where neurons were predominantly
2D selective. Last, there was no signiﬁ-
cant association between Z
3D–Z2D and stereoscopic cue sensi-
tivity in either area (sensitivity main effects and interactions, p R
0.10). This may reﬂect that the two measures quantify sensitivity
to qualitatively different 3D motion cues and further suggests
that processing at the level of 2D selective neurons fundamen-
tally limits sensitivity to stereoscopic cues to 3D motion.
Hierarchical model of 3D motion computation
The above ﬁndings revealed a hierarchical transformation be-
tween MT and FST that generalized the decoding of 3D motion.
A potential mechanism for computing 3D motion is to integrate
the output of 2D retinal-motion selective neurons with different
direction preferences and ODs.
26,36 In that case, interocular 2D
direction preference differences should be larger for 3D than
for 2D selective neurons. To test this possibility, we compared
the 2D direction preferences of individual neurons measured
separately for the left and right eyes (| D2D|). As predicted for
this mechanism, interocular differences in 2D direction prefer-
ences were signiﬁcantly larger for 3D (MT, median = 39.81
/C14 ,
n = 9; FST, median = 37.25 /C14 , n = 58) than for 2D (MT, median =
6.36/C14 , n = 80; FST, median = 6.50/C14 , n = 66) selective neurons (Wil-
coxon rank sum, p = 2.8 3 10/C0 10)( Figure S6). Consistent with the
greater prevalence of 3D selectivity in FST than in MT, | D2D|
values were signiﬁcantly larger in FST than in MT (FST, median =
15.67/C14 , n = 157; MT, median = 7.14/C14 , n = 106; Wilcoxon rank sum,
p = 2.6 3 10/C0 4). These results thus conﬁrmed that larger interoc-
ular 2D direction preference differences were indeed associated
with 3D motion selectivity.
Given these empirical results, we used computational
modeling to explore if integrating the output of neurons with
different 2D retinal-motion direction preferences and ODs could
broadly account for 3D motion selectivity spanning the space of
3D motion directions (STAR Methods). The ﬁrst layer simulated a
population of 2D retinal-motion selective units that were either
left- or right-eye dominant (equal proportions) and jointly tuned
for 2D direction and speed. The incorporation of speed tuning
was necessary to enable the computation of 3D motion trajec-
tories whose two retinal projections differ in both direction and
speed. The tuning properties of the units were identical for the
two eyes, except for an amplitude difference because of OD.
The second layer simulated a population of units that linearly in-
tegrated the output of pairs of ﬁrst-layer, 2D selective units, fol-
lowed by an expansive non-linearity ( Figure 7A).
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 7
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 9 =====
We then assessed if the model was sufﬁcient to build a popu-
lation of units whose preferences spanned the space of 3D direc-
tions (Figure 7B) and whether that selectivity was cue invariant.
The 3D direction tuning curve of a second-layer unit tuned for
away motion is shown in Figure 7C. Importantly, the 3D direction
preference was the same regardless of whether the left, the right,
or both eyes were visually stimulated. This was not unique to
away (or toward) preferring units. Across the second layer, the
preferences spanned the space of 3D directions and were cue
invariant ( Figure S7 ). Thus, the integration of 2D retinal-motion
selective units with different ODs was sufﬁcient to create a pop-
ulation of 3D selective units whose preferences spanned the
space of 3D directions.
DISCUSSION
Transforming ambiguous 2D retinal signals into behaviorally rele-
vant representations of 3D motion is an essential function of the
visual system.
4 While the hierarchical organization of MT and
FST has long been anatomically known, 37,38 the functional
signiﬁcance of the pathway has remained challenging to
discern.21,27,39 Here we discovered that 2D retinal-motion sig-
nals are transformed across MT and FST into a robust represen-
tation of 3D motion. Importantly, we showed that the transforma-
tion generalizes the decoding of motion signals, such that a
single decoder could extract the direction of 3D motion irrespec-
tive of the deﬁning cues or which eye was open. Last, we showed
how the transformation could be implemented through a linear-
non-linear cascade.
Previous reports came to opposite conclusions regarding
whether MT represents 3D
13,14 or 2D12 motion. Multiple lines of
evidence in the current study converged to indicate that 3D
motion selectivity is rare in MT. First, for the vast majority of
MT neurons, the apparent 3D direction preference was opposite
for left- and right-eye perspective cue stimuli, indicating that the
responses were driven by the net direction of 2D retinal motion.
Second, responses to 3D motion in the binocular viewing condi-
tions were well explained by lower-level properties of 2D direc-
tion selectivity and OD. Third, our results showed that decoding
3D motion from MT would require highly dynamic utrocular (eye
of origin) information, but monkeys do not use such information
to discriminate 3D motion.
8 In the absence of utrocular informa-
tion, decoding 3D motion from MT would result in systematic
confusions of toward and away motion, depending on whether
one eye (or the other) was closed. While motion-in-depth confu-
sions have been observed in human psychophysics,
40–42 they
are distinct from the current ﬁndings. Speciﬁcally, confusions
in decoding 3D motion from MT were associated with non-domi-
nant eye perspective cues, whereas confusions in human
perceptual data occurred in low-contrast binocular viewing con-
ditions. Fourth, the neurometric sensitivities of MT neurons were
consistently larger in the monocular viewing conditions than in
the binocular viewing conditions. This ﬁnding is consistent with
2D retinal-motion opponency, in which opposing dichoptic mo-
tion signals during the binocular presentation of toward/away
motion suppressed neuronal responses. As such, the responses
of MT neurons did not account for the behavioral sensitivity of the
monkeys, which was greater in the combined-cue condition than
the isolated cue conditions.
Previous work suggested that an interaction between 2D di-
rection selectivity and OD supports non-canonical encoding/de-
coding of 3D motion in MT.
16 Although these physiological prop-
erties are consistent with our results, the model would be highly
inefﬁcient, since the decoder would not generalize across visual
cues or viewing conditions. The model also has untenable impli-
cations. In particular, if the mechanism was sufﬁcient for deﬁning
3D motion selectivity, then it would also be necessary to classify
2D motion selective retinal ganglion cells as 3D selective, since
they too will selectively respond to toward or away motion as a
simple consequence of projective geometry. Thus, a more parsi-
monious conclusion is that MT is largely specialized for 2D
retinal-motion processing
12,15,43,44 and that the persistence of
OD in MT enables downstream computations that support
robust 3D motion processing.
Our ﬁnding of 3D motion selectivity in FST is consistent with a
recent neuroimaging study that suggested that neurons in the
area encode stereomotion.
15 Interestingly, we found roughly
equal proportions of 2D and 3D motion selective neurons in
FST. This ﬁnding is consistent with the area containing a broad
representation of 3D motion, since 2D directions are a subset
of the larger space of 3D directions. Moreover, the behavioral
sensitivity of the monkeys across the four cue conditions was
best explained by the neurometric sensitivities of 3D selective
FST neurons—the same neurons whose responses could be lin-
early decoded to provide a generalized, cue-invariant readout of
3D motion. Indeed, only the sensitivity of the 3D selective neu-
rons reﬂected the number of visual cues signaling 3D motion,
Figure 7. Hierarchical model of 3D motion encoding
(A) Model schematic. The ﬁrst layer included two populations of 2D direction
selective units with left- (blue) or right- (green) eye ocular dominance. Pairs of
ﬁrst-layer units with different 2D direction preferences and ODs were linearly
combined followed by an expansive non-linearity (inset) in the second layer to
create 3D selective units (black).
(B) Directions of motion. Directions were sampled across eight azimuths (red)
and seven elevations (blue), for a total of 42 unique trajectories.
(C) Responses of a second-layer unit that preferred away motion, plotted using
an equal-area Lambert projection. Yellow hues indicate higher ﬁring rates and
blue hues indicate lower ﬁring rates. The preference for away motion was in-
dependent of whether the left eye (left image), the right eye (middle image), or
both eyes (right image) were visually stimulated, and therefore the unit was cue
invariant. See also Figures S6 and S7.
8 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 10 =====
implying cue integration consistent with the animal’s behavior.
This starkly contrasts with the 2D selective neurons, whose
sensitivity reﬂected whether the viewing conditions were monoc-
ular (more sensitive) or binocular (less sensitive), consistent with
2D motion opponency. These ﬁndings collectively suggest that
FST is a prominent site of 3D motion processing, which may sup-
port the integration of 3D motion cues in a statistically optimal
fashion.
8
How might the 2D-to-3D transformation of visual motion sig-
nals be accomplished across MT and FST? Theoretical work
suggests that 3D motion selectivity may arise, in part, through in-
terocular differences in 2D direction preferences.
26,36 In line with
this, FST neurons showed larger differences in interocular 2D di-
rection preferences than MT neurons. Although the experiments
only tested 3D motion trajectories that intersected the cyclopean
eye, our simulations showed that a mechanism based on inter-
ocular differences in 2D direction and speed tuning could sup-
port a population of units representing the full span of 3D direc-
tions. It will be interesting for future work to characterize the
distribution of 3D directions represented by FST and relate that
distribution to the natural scene statistics of 3D motion. Howev-
er, doing so will also require the natural scene statistics of 3D
motion to be characterized. The current ﬁndings suggest that
motions toward the monkey will be overrepresented, which
may imply that the distribution will reﬂect a combination of scene
statistics and the behavioral relevance of speciﬁc trajectories.
Interestingly, we found that, although MT was largely specialized
for 2D motion processing, neurons with signiﬁcant combined-
cue tuning tended to have 2D direction preferences and ODs
consistent with toward motion (rightward motion + left OD,
n = 67; leftward motion + right OD, n = 57) as opposed to
away motion (leftward motion and left OD, n = 33; rightward mo-
tion + right OD, n = 37). This may have contributed to the ﬁnding
that more downstream 3D selective FST neurons preferred
toward rather than away motion.
Previous computational work demonstrated that 3D motion
selectivity could be achieved by integrating the output of
units with opposite horizontal direction preferences and
ODs.
16,17,26,36 We extended that work to show that a population
of units whose direction preferences spanned the space of 3D
motion could be created using a cascade model in which 2D mo-
tion selective units with OD were selectively integrated. This was
achieved by allowing the integrated units to have different 2D di-
rection (not just opposite) preferences, speed preferences, and
ODs. Importantly, we found that these properties were sufﬁcient
to generalize the creation of 3D direction selectivity. The model
did not explore, however, if this selectivity was also shaped by
computations such as motion opponency, earlier stages of
binocular integration, or divisive normalization. These computa-
tions are widely implicated in the hierarchical processing of
retinal motion as well as motion in depth.
17,45,46 They may also
be important to build selectivity for eye-speciﬁc optic ﬂow pat-
terns (see limitations of the study), which may speculatively
lead to reduced responses to high-coherence stereoscopic
cue stimuli that lack natural perspective cues. Exploring these
computations in the context of 3D motion processing is therefore
likely to further advance our understanding of how motion sig-
nals are transformed across the V1-MT-FST hierarchy.
Although little is currently known about the role of FST in visual
processing, it has been linked to object recognition and segmen-
tation, attention, change detection, and structure-from-motion
processing.
15,17,20,21,27,39,47,48 Taking this together with the pre-
sent ﬁndings and evidence of connections to visual areas in the
ventral pathway,38,49,50 it is conceivable that FST contributes to
the binding of object identity and 3D motion, enabling the
tracking of speciﬁc objects through space.
4 Interestingly, inacti-
vation of the superior colliculus (SC) was recently shown to
modulate FST’s activity and selectivity. 39 In line with this, we
observed saccade-related activity in FST that preceded eye
movements in an overlap saccade task. Future work can deter-
mine whether that activity is associated with FST’s connection to
the SC and ascertain if it is functionally related to selective spatial
attention.
Several visual areas, in addition to FST, are known to contain
3D motion selective neurons.
51–53 Some of these areas, such
as MSTd, are strongly implicated in self-motion processing.
Compared with the large RFs of neurons in areas that support
self-motion processing, neurons in the lateral/ventral portion of
MST (MSTl/v) and FST have smaller RFs that may be more suit-
able for processing 3D object motion.
4,54–57 This possibility is
consistent with our ﬁnding that small (3/C14 diameter) stimuli elicited
robust responses from FST neurons. The functional relationship
between FST and MSTl/v in object-motion processing and the
potential contributions of FST to self-motion processing are
important topics for future studies.
Limitations of the study
This study extends our understanding of the cortical areas and hi-
erarchical computations that contribute to visual motion process-
ing.
4 Previous work revealed hierarchical processing of 2D retinal
motion, in which component motion signals extracted at the level
of V1 were integrated to form pattern motion representations in
MT.
24,58 The current ﬁndings reveal a subsequent stage of motion
integration at the level of FST that transforms 2D retinal motion into
a behaviorally relevant, cue-invariant representation of 3D motion.
While the current study demonstrated a functional association be-
tween FST and 3D motion processing, it did not test if FST causally
contributes to 3D perception. The experiments also only assessed
selectivity for motion toward and away from the cyclopean eye.
Knowledge of the shape and bandwidth of FST tuning curves
over the span of 3D directions can further constrain models that
capture the contributions of additional computations and areas
to 3D motion processing. Such information would also be valuable
for investigating the coordinate frame(s) in which FST neurons
represent 3D motion. Last, an intriguing possibility to explore is
that selectivity for eye-speciﬁc perspective cues to 3D motion (op-
tic ﬂow) is achieved computationally through non-linear RF struc-
tures that are distinct for each eye.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 9
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 11 =====
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Animal preparation
d METHOD DETAILS
B Behavioral control and stimulus presentation
B Visual stimuli
B Receptive ﬁeld mapping
B Behavioral tasks
B Neuronal recordings
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Behavioral data analysis
B Visual response latency
B Saccade analysis
B Asymmetry Index (AI)
B Monocularity Index
B 2D motion analysis
B Classiﬁcation of 2D retinal-motion and 3D motion
selectivity
B Linear population decoding
B Neurometric sensitivity
B Hierarchical model of 3D motion encoding
B Vergence control
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
celrep.2023.113524.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Zikang Zhu for assistance with monkey training. The work was sup-
ported by National Institutes of Health grants EY035005 and EY029438. L.W.T.
was supported by National Science Foundation LUCID Training Program
1545481, McPherson Eye Research Institute Graduate Student Support Initia-
tive and Expanding Our Vision 2020 awards, and National Institutes of Health
grant NS105602. B.K. was supported by National Institutes of Health grant
NS128586. B.R. was supported by ASPIRE, the technology program manage-
ment pillar of Abu Dhabi’s Advanced Technology Research Council, via the
ASPIRE Precision Medicine Research Institute Abu Dhabi (VRI-20-10) and
the NYUAD Center for Brain and Health, funded by Tamkeen under NYU
Abu Dhabi Research Institute grant CG012. Further support was provided by
National Institutes of Health grant P51OD011106 to the Wisconsin National
Primate Research Center.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, L.W.T., B.R., and A.R.; methodology, L.W.T., B.K., B.R.,
and A.R.; investigation, L.W.T.; formal analysis, L.W.T., B.K., and A.R.; data
curation, L.W.T. and B.K.; writing – original draft, L.W.T., B.R., and A.R.;
writing – review and editing, L.W.T., B.K., B.R., and A.R.; visualization,
L.W.T.; supervision, B.R. and A.R.; resources, A.R.; funding acquisition, A.R.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 23, 2023
Revised: October 25, 2023
Accepted: November 15, 2023
REFERENCES
1. Barton, R.A. (2004). Binocularity and brain evolution in primates. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 10113–10115.
2. Bradley, D.C., and Goyal, M.S. (2008). Velocity computation in the primate
visual system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 686–695.
3. Cormack, L.K., Czuba, T.B., Kno ¨ ll, J., and Huk, A.C. (2017). Binocular
mechanisms of 3D motion processing. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 3, 297–318.
4. Rosenberg, A., Thompson, L.W., Doudlah, R., and Chang, T.Y. (2023).
Neuronal representations supporting three-dimensional vision in
nonhuman primates. Annu. Rev. Vis. Sci. 9, 337–359.
5. Czuba, T.B., Rokers, B., Guillet, K., Huk, A.C., and Cormack, L.K. (2011).
Three-dimensional motion aftereffects reveal distinct direction-selective
mechanisms for binocular processing of motion through depth. J. Vis.
11, 18.
6. Thompson, L., Ji, M., Rokers, B., and Rosenberg, A. (2019). Contribu-
tions of binocular and monocular cues to motion-in-depth perception.
J. Vis. 19,2 .
7. Fulvio, J.M., Ji, M., Thompson, L., Rosenberg, A., and Rokers, B. (2020).
Cue-dependent effects of VR experience on motion-in-depth sensitivity.
PLoS One 15, e0229929.
8. Thompson, L.W., Kim, B., Zhu, Z., Rokers, B., and Rosenberg, A. (2021).
Perspective cues make eye-speciﬁc contributions to 3D motion percep-
tion. J. Cognit. Neurosci. 34, 192–208.
9. Born, R.T., and Bradley, D.C. (2005). Structure and function of visual area
MT. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 28, 157–189.
10. Zeki, S.M. (1974). Cells responding to changing image size and disparity in
the cortex of the rhesus monkey. J. Physiol. 242, 827–841.
11. Albright, T.D. (1984). Direction and orientation selectivity of neurons in vi-
sual area MT of the macaque. J. Neurophysiol. 52, 1106–1130.
12. Maunsell, J.H., and Van Essen, D.C. (1983). Functional properties of neu-
rons in middle temporal visual area of the macaque monkey. II. Binocular
interactions and sensitivity to binocular disparity. J. Neurophysiol. 49,
1148–1167.
13. Czuba, T.B., Huk, A.C., Cormack, L.K., and Kohn, A. (2014). Area MT en-
codes three-dimensional motion. J. Neurosci. 34, 15522–15533.
14. Sanada, T.M., and DeAngelis, G.C. (2014). Neural representation of mo-
tion-in-depth in area MT. J. Neurosci. 34, 15508–15521.
15. He´ jja-Brichard, Y., Rima, S., Rapha, E., Durand, J.B., and Cottereau, B.R.
(2020). Stereomotion processing in the nonhuman primate brain. Cerebr.
Cortex 30, 4528–4543.
16. Bonnen, K., Czuba, T.B., Whritner, J.A., Kohn, A., Huk, A.C., and Cor-
mack, L.K. (2020). Binocular viewing geometry shapes the neural repre-
sentation of the dynamic three-dimensional environment. Nat. Neurosci.
23, 113–121.
17. Baker, P.M., and Bair, W. (2016). A model of binocular motion integration in
MT neurons. J. Neurosci. 36, 6563–6582.
18. Petro, L.S., Smith, F.W., Schyns, P.G., and Muckli, L. (2013). Decoding
face categories in diagnostic subregions of primary visual cortex. Eur. J.
Neurosci. 37, 1130–1139.
19. Gattass, R., and Gross, C.G. (1981). Visual topography of striate projection
zone (MT) in posterior superior temporal sulcus of the macaque.
J. Neurophysiol. 46, 621–638.
20. Desimone, R., and Ungerleider, L.G. (1986). Multiple visual areas in the
caudal superior temporal sulcus of the macaque. J. Comp. Neurol. 248,
164–189.
21. Rosenberg, A., Wallisch, P., and Bradley, D.C. (2008). Responses to direc-
tion and transparent motion stimuli in area FST of the macaque. Vis. Neu-
rosci. 25, 187–195.
22. Kolster, H., Mandeville, J.B., Arsenault, J.T., Ekstrom, L.B., Wald, L.L., and
Vanduffel, W. (2009). Visual ﬁeld map clusters in macaque extrastriate
visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 29, 7031–7039.
10 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 12 =====
23. Smith, M.A., Majaj, N.J., and Movshon, J.A. (2005). Dynamics of motion
signaling by neurons in macaque area MT. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 220–228.
24. Khawaja, F.A., Tsui, J.M.G., and Pack, C.C. (2009). Pattern motion selec-
tivity of spiking outputs and local ﬁeld potentials in macaque visual cortex.
J. Neurosci. 29, 13702–13709.
25. Ni, A.M., Huang, C., Doiron, B., and Cohen, M.R. (2022). A general decod-
ing strategy explains the relationship between behavior and correlated
variability. Elife 11, e67258.
26. Sabatini, S.P., and Solari, F. (2004). Emergence of motion-in-depth selec-
tivity in the visual cortex through linear combination of binocular energy
complex cells with different ocular dominance. Neurocomputing 58–60,
865–872.
27. Mysore, S.G., Vogels, R., Raiguel, S.E., Todd, J.T., and Orban, G.A. (2010).
The selectivity of neurons in the macaque fundus of the superior temporal
area for three-dimensional structure from motion. J. Neurosci. 30, 15491–
15508.
28. Britten, K.H., Newsome, W.T., Shadlen, M.N., Celebrini, S., and Movshon,
J.A. (1996). A relationship between behavioral choice and the visual re-
sponses of neurons in macaque MT. Vis. Neurosci. 13, 87–100.
29. Elmore, L.C., Rosenberg, A., DeAngelis, G.C., and Angelaki, D.E. (2019).
Choice-related activity during visual slant discrimination in macaque CIP
but not V3A. eNeuro 6. ENEURO.0248, 18.2019.
30. Snowden, R.J., Treue, S., Erickson, R.G., and Andersen, R.A. (1991). The
response of area MT and V1 neurons to transparent motion. J. Neurosci.
11, 2768–2785.
31. Qian, N., and Andersen, R.A. (1994). Transparent motion perception as
detection of unbalanced motion signals. J. Neurosci. 14, 7367–7380.
32. Qian, N., and Andersen, R.A. (1995). V1 responses to transparent and non-
transparent motions. Exp. Brain Res. 103, 41–50.
33. Ma, W.J., Beck, J.M., Latham, P.E., and Pouget, A. (2006). Bayesian infer-
ence with probabilistic population codes. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1432–1438.
34. Chang, T.Y., Doudlah, R., Kim, B., Sunkara, A., Thompson, L.W., Lowe,
M.E., and Rosenberg, A. (2020). Functional links between sensory repre-
sentations, choice activity, and sensorimotor associations in parietal cor-
tex. Elife 9, e57968.
35. Seilheimer, R.L., Rosenberg, A., and Angelaki, D.E. (2014). Models and
processes of multisensory cue combination. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.
25, 38–46.
36. Poggio, G.F., and Talbot, W.H. (1981). Mechanisms of static and dynamic
stereopsis in foveal cortex of the rhesus monkey. J. Physiol. 315, 469–492.
37. Ungerleider, L.G., and Desimone, R. (1986). Cortical connections of visual
area MT in the macaque. J. Comp. Neurol. 248, 190–222.
38. Boussaoud, D., Ungerleider, L.G., and Desimone, R. (1990). Pathways for
motion analysis: cortical connections of the medial superior temporal and
fundus of the superior temporal visual areas in the macaque. J. Comp.
Neurol. 296, 462–495.
39. Bogadhi, A.R., Katz, L.N., Bollimunta, A., Leopold, D.A., and Krauzlis, R.J.
(2021). Midbrain activity shapes high-level visual properties in the primate
temporal cortex. Neuron 109, 690–699.e5.
40. Welchman, A.E., Tuck, V.L., and Harris, J.M. (2004). Human observers are
biased in judging the angular approach of a projectile. Vis. Res. 44,
2027–2042.
41. Fulvio, J.M., Rosen, M.L., and Rokers, B. (2015). Sensory uncertainty
leads to systematic misperception of the direction of motion in depth. At-
ten. Percept. Psychophys. 77, 1685–1696.
42. Rokers, B., Fulvio, J.M., Pillow, J.W., and Cooper, E.A. (2018). Systematic
misperceptions of 3-D motion explained by Bayesian inference. J. Vis.
18, 23.
43. Lagae, L., Maes, H., Raiguel, S., Xiao, D.K., and Orban, G.A. (1994). Re-
sponses of macaque STS neurons to optic ﬂow components: a compari-
son of areas MT and MST. J. Neurophysiol. 71, 1597–1626.
44. Nakhla, N., Korkian, Y., Krause, M.R., and Pack, C.C. (2021). Neural selec-
tivity for visual motion in macaque area V3A. eNeuro 8. ENEURO.0383,
20.2020.
45. Rust, N.C., Mante, V., Simoncelli, E.P., and Movshon, J.A. (2006). How MT
cells analyze the motion of visual patterns. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 1421–1431.
46. Simoncelli, E.P., and Heeger, D.J. (1998). A model of neuronal responses
in visual area MT. Vis. Res. 38, 743–761.
47. Kilintari, M., Raos, V., and Savaki, H.E. (2014). Involvement of the superior
temporal cortex in action execution and action observation. J. Neurosci.
34, 8999–9011.
48. Bogadhi, A.R., Bollimunta, A., Leopold, D.A., and Krauzlis, R.J. (2019).
Spatial Attention Deﬁcits Are Causally Linked to an Area in Macaque Tem-
poral Cortex. Curr. Biol. 29, 726–736.e4.
49. Saleem, K.S., Suzuki, W., Tanaka, K., and Hashikawa, T. (2000). Connec-
tions between anterior inferotemporal cortex and superior temporal sulcus
regions in the macaque monkey. J. Neurosci. 20, 5083–5101.
50. Ungerleider, L.G., Galkin, T.W., Desimone, R., and Gattass, R. (2008).
Cortical connections of area V4 in the macaque. Cerebr. Cortex 18,
477–499.
51. Chen, A., Gu, Y., Liu, S., DeAngelis, G.C., and Angelaki, D.E. (2016). Evi-
dence for a causal contribution of macaque vestibular, but not intraparie-
tal, cortex to heading perception. J. Neurosci. 36, 3789–3798.
52. Sunkara, A., DeAngelis, G.C., and Angelaki, D.E. (2016). Joint representa-
tion of translational and rotational components of optic ﬂow in parietal cor-
tex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, 5077–5082.
53. Gu, Y., Deangelis, G.C., and Angelaki, D.E. (2012). Causal links between
dorsal medial superior temporal area neurons and multisensory heading
perception. J. Neurosci. 32, 2299–2313.
54. Komatsu, H., and Wurtz, R.H. (1988). Relation of cortical areas MT and
MST to pursuit eye movements. I. Localization and visual properties of
neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 60, 580–603.
55. Tanaka, K., Sugita, Y., Moriya, M., and Saito, H. (1993). Analysis of object
motion in the ventral part of the medial superior temporal area of the ma-
caque visual cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 69, 128–142.
56. Eifuku, S., and Wurtz, R.H. (1998). Response to motion in extrastriate area
MSTl: center-surround interactions. J. Neurophysiol. 80, 282–296.
57. Sasaki, R., Angelaki, D.E., and DeAngelis, G.C. (2019). Processing of ob-
ject motion and self-motion in the lateral subdivision of the medial superior
temporal area in macaques. J. Neurophysiol. 121, 1207–1221.
58. Movshon, J.A., Adelson, E.H., Gizzi, M.S., and Newsome, W.T. (1985). The
analysis of visual moving patterns. Pattern recognition mechanisms,
117–151.
59. Kim, B., Kenchappa, S.C., Sunkara, A., Chang, T.-Y., Thompson, L., Dou-
dlah, R., and Rosenberg, A. (2019). Real-time experimental control using
network-based parallel processing. Elife 8, e40231.
60. Kleiner, M., Brainard, D.H., Pelli, D.G., Broussard, C., Wolf, T., and Niehor-
ster, D. (2007). What’s new in Psychtoolbox-3? Perception 36, S14.
61. Rosenberg, A., Cowan, N.J., and Angelaki, D.E. (2013). The visual repre-
sentation of 3D object orientation in parietal cortex. J. Neurosci. 33,
19352–19361.
62. Rosenberg, A., and Angelaki, D.E. (2014). Gravity inﬂuences the visual rep-
resentation of object tilt in parietal cortex. J. Neurosci.
34, 14170–14180.
63. Rosenberg, A., and Angelaki, D.E. (2014). Reliability-dependent contribu-
tions of visual orientation cues in parietal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 111, 18043–18048.
64. Doudlah, R., Chang, T.Y., Thompson, L.W., Kim, B., Sunkara, A., and
Rosenberg, A. (2022). Parallel processing, hierarchical transformations,
and sensorimotor associations along the ’where’ pathway. Elife 11,
e78712.
65. Cooper, E.A., van Ginkel, M., and Rokers, B. (2016). Sensitivity and bias in
the discrimination of two-dimensional and three-dimensional motion di-
rection. J. Vis. 16,5 .
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 11
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 13 =====
66. Allen, B., Haun, A.M., Hanley, T., Green, C.S., and Rokers, B. (2015).
Optimal combination of the binocular cues to 3D motion. Invest. Ophthal-
mol. Vis. Sci. 56, 7589–7596.
67. Van Essen, D.C., Lewis, J.W., Drury, H.A., Hadjikhani, N., Tootell, R.B., Ba-
kircioglu, M., and Miller, M.I. (2001). Mapping visual cortex in monkeys and
humans using surface-based atlases. Vis. Res. 41, 1359–1378.
68. Gray, C.M., Maldonado, P.E., Wilson, M., and McNaughton, B. (1995). Tet-
rodes markedly improve the reliability and yield of multiple single-unit
isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate cortex. J. Neurosci.
Methods 63, 43–54.
69. Harris, K.D., Henze, D.A., Csicsvari, J., Hirase, H., and Buzsa´ ki, G. (2000).
Accuracy of tetrode spike separation as determined by simultaneous
intracellular and extracellular measurements. J. Neurophysiol. 84,
401–414.
70. Schmitzer-Torbert, N., Jackson, J., Henze, D., Harris, K., and Redish, A.D.
(2005). Quantitative measures of cluster quality for use in extracellular re-
cordings. Neuroscience 131, 1–11.
71. Sch€utt, H.H., Harmeling, S., Macke, J.H., and Wichmann, F.A. (2016).
Painfree and accurate Bayesian estimation of psychometric functions
for (potentially) overdispersed data. Vis. Res. 122, 105–123.
72. Tailby, C., Majaj, N.J., and Movshon, J.A. (2010). Binocular integration of
pattern motion signals by MT neurons and by human observers.
J. Neurosci. 30, 7344–7349.
73. Sasaki, R., Anzai, A., Angelaki, D.E., and DeAngelis, G.C. (2020). Flexible
coding of object motion in multiple reference frames by parietal cortex
neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 1004–1015.
74. Nover, H., Anderson, C.H., and DeAngelis, G.C. (2005). A logarithmic,
scale-invariant representation of speed in macaque middle temporal
area accounts for speed discrimination performance. J. Neurosci. 25,
10049–10060.
75. DeAngelis, G.C., and Uka, T. (2003). Coding of horizontal disparity and ve-
locity by MT neurons in the alert macaque. J. Neurophysiol. 89,
1094–1111.
12 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 14 =====
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by Ari Rosenberg ( ari.rosenberg@wisc.edu).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
d Supporting neuronal data have been made available in a public repository ( https://osf.io/qvts8/) as of the date of publication.
d This paper does not report original code.
d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Animal preparation
Two male rhesus macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta; Monkey J: 6.2 years of age, 8.4 kg in weight; Monkey C: 5.8 years, 9.0 kg) were
used in this study. All surgeries and experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison (Protocol G005229) and were in accordance with NIH guidelines. A head-stabilizing Delrin ring
was surgically attached to the skull under general anesthesia.
29,34,61–64 After recovery, the monkeys were trained to sit in a primate
chair and ﬁxate visual targets within 2/C14 version and 1/C14 vergence windows for liquid reward. Both monkeys previously participated in a
study which used the same stimuli and discrimination task to assess behavioral sensitivity to perspective and stereoscopic cues to
3D motion across the visual ﬁeld.
8
METHOD DETAILS
Behavioral control and stimulus presentation
Experimental control was performed using the REC-GUI software (RRID:SCR_019008). 59 Stimuli were rear projected onto a polar-
ization preserving screen (Screen-Tech e.K.) using a DLP LED projector (PROPixx; VPixx Technologies, Inc.) with a resolution of 1920
x 1080 pixels (58
/C14 x3 5/C14 ) at 120 Hz. The screen was 57 cm from the monkey. Polarized glasses were worn. A phototransistor circuit
was used to conﬁrm the synchronization of the left- and right-eye images, and to align neuronal responses to the stimulus onset. The
stimuli were created in MATLAB R2015a using Psychtoolbox 3 60 and rendered with anti-aliasing using an NVIDIA 1080T graphics
card on a Linux workstation. Eye tracking was performed at 1,000 Hz (EyeLink 1000 plus, SR Research).
Visual stimuli
The 3D motion stimuli were previously described in detail.8 Brieﬂy, they depicted a volume with dots moving toward or away from the
cyclopean eye. Twenty-two dots, 11 light (113 cd/m 2) and 11 dark (0.04 cd/m 2), were initialized with pseudorandom x, y, and z po-
sitions within the volume. The volume was oriented toward the cyclopean eye, spanned ±1/C14 of horizontal disparity ( /C24 42.5 cm of
depth), and corresponded to a 3 /C14 diameter circular aperture on the screen. The background was gray (60 cd/m 2). Seven motion
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) Wisconsin National Primate Research Center https://primate.wisc.edu
Deposited data
Neuronal data This study OSF: https://osf.io/qvts8/
Software and algorithms
MATLAB Mathworks RRID: SCR_001622
Plexon Plexon, Inc. RRID: SCR_000012
REC-GUI Kim et al. 59 RRID: SCR_019008
Psychtoolbox Kleiner et al. 60 RRID: SCR_002881
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 13
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 15 =====
coherences were used: 0, 0.09, 0.18, 0.36, 0.45, 0.64, and 1 (0/22, 2/22, 4/22, 8/22, 10/22, 14/22, and 22/22 signal/total dots, respec-
tively). Signal and noise dots were pseudorandomly assigned each stereoscopic frame-pair. Signal dots moved toward or away from
the monkey with an average retinal speed of /C24 4.2/C14 /s while noise dots were reassigned to pseudorandom positions within the volume.
The signal dot speed approximately maximized perceptual sensitivity to 3D motion 8,65 (Figure S8).
Four 3D motion cue conditions were included: (1) combined-cue stimuli which contained perspective and stereoscopic cues, (2)
left-eye perspective cue stimuli, (3) right-eye perspective cue stimuli, and (4) stereoscopic cue stimuli. The perspective cues included
optic ﬂow and changes in the retinal density and size of the visual elements. Due to the horizontal offset of the eyes, the optic ﬂow
patterns for each eye had foci of expansion/contraction that were horizontally offset in opposite directions on the screen. Thus, the
perspective cues were eye-speciﬁc, and left- and right-eye stimuli had opposite net horizontal motion directions. The stereoscopic
cues included changing disparity and interocular velocity differences.
66 Dot disparities were uniformly distributed throughout the
stimulus volume. It was therefore impossible to discriminate the direction of motion or account for neuronal selectivity to the stimuli
based on the distribution of instantaneous disparities, dot sizes, or dot density on the screen. Stimulus examples are provided in an
Extended Data Movie ( https://osf.io/dsjza).
The 2D motion stimuli (22 dots, 11 light and 11 dark) were presented monocularly and binocularly within a 3
/C14 diameter circular aper-
ture at eight directions (0 /C14 to 315 /C14 in 45 /C14 steps). The horizontal (0 /C14 and 180 /C14 ) monocular conditions were equivalent to monocular
views of the stereoscopic cue stimuli at 100% coherence. The 2D stimuli were presented at a speed of /C24 4.2/C14 /s for all neurons, as
well as at 12.6 /C14 /s for 165 MT and 523 FST neurons.
Receptive ﬁeld mapping
Initial receptive ﬁeld (RF) estimates were obtained with hand-mapping techniques using random dot patches, drifting gratings, and/or
oriented bars. Based on the estimates, a rectangular region with /C24 400-600 square patches was deﬁned to cover and extend beyond
the RF. Dark and light squares were ﬂashed (150 ms duration) in an alternating sequence at pseudorandom locations during ﬁxation
of a target. A liquid reward was provided after every 20 ﬂashes. If ﬁxation was broken, the monkey was required to ﬁxate the target for
300 ms before the sequence resumed. A single repetition was completed when light and dark squares had been ﬂashed at each loca-
tion. At least four blocks were completed each session. Responses at each grid location were averaged over blocks (regardless of
brightness). A 2D Gaussian contour was ﬁt to the average responses. The mean of the Gaussian was used as an estimate of the RF
center. The sigma values deﬁned principal axes demarcating an ellipse used to calculate the RF area.
Behavioral tasks
We ﬁrst measured 2D direction selectivity during passive ﬁxation by pseudorandomly presenting eight directions of motion both
monocularly and binocularly and at either one or two speeds. The monkey received a liquid reward after every third stimulus.
The 3D motion stimuli were then presented as part of a toward/away motion discrimination task. The trial structure proceeded as
follows. First, a monkey acquired ﬁxation on a red circular target (0.1
/C14 , 20.5 cd/m 2) at the center of the screen and aligned with the
cyclopean eye. After 300 ms, a stimulus appeared for 1 s while ﬁxation was maintained. The ﬁxation target then disappeared and two
red choice targets (0.1
/C14 , 20.5 cd/m2) appeared 9/C14 above/below the ﬁxation target. The direction of motion was indicated as ‘toward’
or ‘away’ by making a saccade to the lower or upper target, respectively. A liquid reward was provided for correct responses. Re-
sponses to 0% coherence trials were rewarded pseudorandomly with 50% probability.
Interleaved with the 3D motion stimuli were presentations of monocular and binocular horizontal (0 /C14 and 180/C14 ) 2D motion, without
the choice component of the trial. Also interleaved were trials of an overlap saccade task. On each trial of that task, one of two
saccade targets was presented at locations corresponding to the choice targets in the motion discrimination task for 1 s while ﬁxation
was maintained on a central ﬁxation target. The ﬁxation target then disappeared, and the monkey made an eye movement to the
saccade target for a liquid reward.
The inter-trial interval was 1.5 s. A trial was aborted without reward if ﬁxation was broken before the end of the trial, or if a choice/
saccade was not made within 500 ms. Stimuli were presented in a block structure, with completion of one trial of each condition
required to ﬁnish the block. Aborted trials were reshufﬂed into the block until all were completed. The next block then began. A min-
imum of 5 blocks (mean = 6.2) of the 2D direction and 10 blocks (mean = 21.3) of the 3D motion discrimination/saccade tasks were
required for inclusion in the dataset.
Neuronal recordings
Areas MT and FST were identiﬁed based on anatomical and functional properties. The CARET software was used to register struc-
tural MRIs to the F99 atlas
67 and to estimate electrode trajectories. MT was distinguished from FST according to its well-established
topography, where RFs are organized along a peripheral to foveal visual ﬁeld representation moving posterior to anterior. 19 The RFs
became larger and less topographically organized when transitioning into FST, which is immediately anterior and ventral to MT. 20–22
Recordings were performed using linear array probes with four or eight tetrodes (NeuroNexus, Inc). Tetrodes were separated by
300 mm. Electrodes within a tetrode were arranged in a diamond pattern and separated by 25 mm. Neuronal signals were sampled at
30 kHz and stored with eye movement and phototransistor traces sampled at 1 kHz (Scout Processor; Ripple, Inc). Tetrode record-
ings leverage that the amplitudes of recorded action potentials depend on the distance between the neuron and each channel to
provide additional waveform information for distinguishing neurons.
68 Tetrode-based spike sorting was performed ofﬂine using
14 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 16 =====
the KlustaKwik69 semi-automatic clustering algorithm in MClust 4.0 70 followed by manual reﬁnement based on waveform, stability,
and refractory period violations in Ofﬂine Sorter (Plexon, Inc). As in previous work, 34,64 all isolated units were veriﬁed by at least two
authors. Only neurons for which the stimulus was entirely within the RF were included: 193 MT and 317 FST neurons from the right
hemisphere of Monkey J (33 MT and 33 FST sessions); 165 MT and 217 FST neurons from the left hemisphere of Monkey C (12 MT
and 20 FST sessions).
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Behavioral data analysis
The ability to discriminate toward/away motion was quantiﬁed separately for each cue condition by calculating the proportion of
‘toward’ responses as a function of the directionally signed motion coherence.
8 The data were then ﬁt with a cumulative Gaussian
using Psigniﬁt 4 in MATLAB (Mathworks) to estimate the response bias ( m) and sensitivity ( s/C0 1).71
Visual response latency
The spike times of individual neurons were aligned to the stimulus onset using the phototransistor trace. Following previous work,34,64
spikes were binned with 1 ms resolution and convolved with a double exponential function, which was averaged over all trials to
generate an average spike density function (SDF). The response latency was then deﬁned as the ﬁrst time point after stimulus onset
when the SDF signiﬁcantly deviated from the average level of baseline activity (computed over all trials using the 150 ms of ﬁxation
preceding the stimulus onsets) with maintained signiﬁcance for at least 30 ms (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s HSD test, p < 0.05).
Saccade analysis
A saccade onset was deﬁned as the ﬁrst time point when the velocity of either eye was R150
/C14 /s. An ANOVA ( p < 0.05) on mean re-
sponses during the 150 ms prior to saccade onsets in the overlap saccade task was used to determine whether a neuron had sig-
niﬁcant saccade direction selectivity. For all neurons with signiﬁcant selectivity, trials were grouped according to the preferred and
non-preferred saccade direction. For each trial, two SDFs were created aligned to either the saccade target onset or saccade onset.
The SDFs were then averaged across neurons to generate population time courses for the preferred and non-preferred saccade
directions.
Asymmetry Index (AI)
Neuronal selectivity for 3D motion was quantiﬁed for each cue condition using an Asymmetry Index (AI)
14:
Asymmetry Index ðAIÞ = 1
n
Xn
i = 1
RTðiÞ /C0 RAðiÞ/C12/C12RTðiÞ /C0 RAðiÞ
/C12/C12+savðiÞ
(Equation 1)
where RTðiÞ and RAðiÞ are the mean responses to toward and away motion at the i th motion coherence, and savðiÞ is the average stan-
dard deviation of toward and away responses at that coherence. Responses were computed over the full stimulus duration (1 s). The
AI quantiﬁes the degree of asymmetry in the responses to toward versus away motion. Larger magnitudes indicate greater selectivity,
and positive (negative) values indicate toward (away) preferences. The statistical signiﬁcance of toward/away selectivity was deter-
mined using a two-way ANOVA for direction and motion coherence ( p < 0.05).
Monocularity Index
To interpret visual responses to the combined-cue and stereoscopic cue conditions in relation to monocular views of the same stimuli
and ocular dominance, we computed monocularity measures using the monocular trials:
Monocularity Index =
Rmax /C0 Lmax
Rmax +Lmax
(Equation 2)
where Rmax and Lmax are the maximum responses during right- and left-eye visual stimulation, respectively. The dominant eye was
deﬁned using the sign of the monocularity index, with positive values indicating right dominance and negative values indicating left
dominance.
2D motion analysis
Selectivity for 2D motion was quantiﬁed for each speed and viewing condition (left eye, right eye, or binocular) by performing ANOVAs
(p < 0.05) on mean ﬁring rates calculated over the full stimulus duration (1 s). Direction preferences were estimated from von Mises ﬁts
to the tuning curves.
Classiﬁcation of 2D retinal-motion and 3D motion selectivity
To classify neurons as selective for 2D retinal motion or 3D motion, we computed partial correlations for each neuron in 2D retinal-
motion and 3D motion coordinates using the left- and right-eye perspective cue responses.
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 15
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 17 =====
R2D = r2D /C0 r3DrMﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ/C0
1 /C0 r2
3DÞð1 /C0 r2
M
/C1q (Equation 3)
R3D = r3D /C0 r2DrMﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 /C0 r2
2DÞð1 /C0 r2
MÞ
p (Equation 4)
Here, r2D is the correlation between the dominant- and non-dominant eyes’ perspective cue responses in 2D retinal-motion coor-
dinates and r3D is the correlation between the responses aligned relative to the direction of 3D motion (toward/away). The 2D retinal-
motion coordinates were obtained by reﬂecting the dominant eyes’ perspective cue responses about the 0% motion coherence.
Lastly, rM is the correlation between the dominant eye’s perspective cue responses in the two coordinate frames. The partial corre-
lation coefﬁcients were then converted to Z-scores (Z2D and Z3D) using Fisher’s r to Z transformation:
Z2D = 0:5ln
/C18 1+R2D
1 /C0 R3D
/C19 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
df
p
(Equation 5)
Z3D = 0:5ln
/C18 1+R3D
1 /C0 R2D
/C19 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
df
p
(Equation 6)
Here, the degrees of freedom, df, were equal to the number of motion coherences (13) minus 3. For a neuron to be classiﬁed as 3D
(or 2D) selective, the difference between Z3D and Z2D was required to exceed 1.28 (or vice versa), corresponding to P = 0.90, which is
a standard criterion used to classify pattern/component selectivity. 23,24,72 Otherwise, the neuron remained unclassiﬁed.
Linear population decoding
We used Fisher’s Linear Discriminant to assess how well toward and away motion could be discriminated using the responses of
different neuronal subpopulations.73 For each decoder, we performed repeated random subsample cross-validation, where 20 trials
were sampled with replacement from each neuron’s response distribution to the combined-cue stimuli (balanced across motion co-
herences). Decoders were trained and tested on 50% of the sampled trials (balanced across motion coherences) using mean re-
sponses over the stimulus duration. This process was repeated 1,000 times and the generalization of each decoder tested using
a bootstrap across all cue conditions and motion coherences.
Neurometric sensitivity
A neurometric function was computed for each neuron and cue condition. Neuronal responses to each cue were grouped according
to the direction preference using the sign of the AI. For each motion coherence, an ROC curve was generated using the response
distributions to the preferred and anti-preferred motions, and the area under the curve provided the proportion of ‘preferred direction
reports’.
28,29 The 0% motion coherence trials were compared using identical distributions and were thus always equal to 0.50. After
computing proportions for each coherence, a cumulative Gaussian was ﬁt to estimate the neurometric sensitivity.
Hierarchical model of 3D motion encoding
A model was developed to explore the potential mechanisms underlying the 2D-to-3D visual motion transformation. We simulated
responses to 3D motion directions at all combinations of eight azimuths (0
/C14 to 315/C14 in 45/C14 steps) and seven elevations (linearly spaced
in the sine of the elevation), for a total of 42 unique directions. Each trajectory simulated motion at 80 cm/s (corresponding approx-
imately to the retinal speed in the experiments, /C24 4.2/C14 /s) centered at a viewing distance of 57 cm. For each trajectory, we ray-traced
the corresponding left- and right-eye 2D velocities assuming an interocular difference of 3 cm.
The ﬁrst layer included 84 units with 2D direction and speed tuning, and either left or right eye ocular dominance (in equal propor-
tions). The tuning function for each unit was described by:
Rðq; sÞ = DC + G 3 OD 3 DðqÞ 3 VðsÞ (Equation 7)
where q is the 2D retinal-motion direction, s is the retinal speed, DC is an offset (5 Hz), G is the gain (30 Hz), and OD is the ocular
dominance (0.6 for the dominant eye and 0.4 for the non-dominant eye). The 2D direction tuning was described by a von Mises func-
tion: DðqÞ = e
k½cosðq /C0 mÞ/C0 1/C138 , where the mean (m) and concentration (k) deﬁne the preference and bandwidth, respectively. The concen-
tration, k, was set to 7, corresponding to a tuning bandwidth of /C24 90/C14 . The speed tuning was described by a log-Gaussian: VðsÞ =
exp
2
64 /C0
log
/C18 s+s0
sp+s0
/C19 2
2s2
3
75, where sp is the preferred speed, s0 is an offset parameter (0.33), and s is the tuning bandwidth (1.16). The
values correspond to median values previously reported for MT74. For units preferring upward or downward motion, the speed tuning
16 Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 18 =====
bandwidth was decreased to 0.5 to produce similar 3D direction tuning bandwidths in the second layer. The velocity preferences of
the units were identical for the two eyes. Each unit was maximally responsive to the 2D retinal motion direction and speed corre-
sponding to one of the 42 simulated 3D motion directions, such that each left (right) eye dominant unit had preferences corresponding
to the left (right) eye projection of a speciﬁc 3D direction.
The second layer consisted of units that integrated the 2D selective responses of the ﬁrst-layer units. There were two sets of
42 units (left-eye dominant or right-eye dominant; 84 units total) that linearly combined pairs of ﬁrst-layer units, followed by an expan-
sive nonlinearity: Rðq; sÞ = ½OD3RLðq; sÞ+ð1 /C0 ODÞ3RRðq; sÞ/C138 d; where d is the expansive nonlinearity (1.1) and units could be left-eye
(OD = 0.6) or right-eye ( OD = 0.4) dominant. By integrating the output of pairs of ﬁrst-layer units ( RL and RR) whose preferences cor-
responded to the eye-speciﬁc 2D retinal motion projections of the 3D motion, each unit was maximally responsive to one of the 42 3D
directions. For example, a second-layer unit that preferred away motion integrated the output of a ﬁrst-layer, left-eye dominant unit
that preferred leftward motion at /C24 4.2/C14 /s and a ﬁrst-layer, right-eye dominant unit that preferred rightward motion at /C24 4.2/C14 /s.
Vergence control
We used a linear mixed effects model to test if small changes in vergence that did not violate the vergence window might have
affected our assessments of 3D selectivity. The analysis was performed on the combined-cue data since these stimuli had the largest
number of cues that could elicit changes in vergence. On each trial, we computed the mean vergence over the stimulus duration. For
each neuron with signiﬁcant combined-cue tuning, we then tested if the combined-cue ﬁring rate depended on main effects of motion
coherence, motion direction, and vergence. Note that this was the same test used to test for combined-cue selectivity, but with ver-
gence added as a covariate. Only 19/194 (9.8%) MT and 25/309 (8.1%) FST neurons showed a signiﬁcant effect of vergence
(p < 0.05). Most importantly, the signiﬁcance of the main effect of motion direction did not depend on whether vergence was included
as a covariate for all but 4 (2.1%) MT and 3 (1.0%) FST neurons. These ﬁndings are similar to those in previous reports
8,14,29,34,64,75
and imply that vergence signals did not account for 3D motion selectivity.
Cell Reports 42, 113524, December 26, 2023 17
Article
ll
OPEN ACCESS
===== PAGE 19 =====
Cell Reports, Volume 42
Supplemental information
Hierarchical computation of 3D motion
across macaque areas MT and FST
Lowell W. Thompson, Byounghoon Kim, Bas Rokers, and Ari Rosenberg
===== PAGE 20 =====
 
 
Figure S1. Saccade-related activity during an overlap saccade task. Related to Figure 2. 
(A) Each trial, the monkey fixated a central target for 300 ms before a saccade target appeared 
either above or below the fixation target for 1 s. The saccade targets had the same locations as 
the choice targets in the 3D motion discrimination task. When the fixation point disappeared, the 
animal made a saccadic eye movement to the target. 
(B) Mean spike density functions (preferred saccade direction: red; non-preferred direction: black) 
for the 35 MT neurons with significant saccade direction selectivity. The left plot shows the time 
courses aligned to the saccade target onset. The vertical black dashed line indicates when the 
fixation point disappeared (go cue). The right plot shows the time courses aligned to the saccade 
onset. The gray shaded region marks the time segment used to assess saccade selectivity. 
(C) Same as B, but for the 98 FST neurons with saccade direction selectivity. Compared to MT, 
FST showed more prominent response modulation beginning ~150 ms before the saccade onset. 

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
 
 
Figure S2. Distributions of toward/away selectivity for each cue condition . Related to 
Figure 3. 
(A) Distribution of AIs in MT for each cue condition (combined -cue: black; left -eye perspective 
cues: blue; right-eye perspective cues: green; stereoscopic cues: magenta; N = 358). Filled bars 
indicate significant toward/away selectivity. Insets indicate the number of neurons with significant 
toward (positive) or away (negative) selectivity. Arrows mark mean AIs. 
(B) Same as A, but for FST (N = 534). In both areas, more neurons preferred toward than away 
motion. 
  

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
 
Figure S3. Time courses of 2D and 3D motion selectivity. Related to Figure 4. 
(A) Time courses of Z3D – Z2D averaged over all 2D selective MT (orange) and FST (purple) 
neurons (50 ms sliding bins with 1 ms  increments). The latency difference between the times 
courses (cross -correlation peak: 𝛕𝛕 = 11 ms) was consistent with the areas’ visual response 
latencies ( Figure 2C ). Note that 2D selectivity was stronger in MT than FST throughout the 
response. 
(B) Same as A, but for 3D selective neurons. Statistical comparisons were not possible given the 
small number of 3D selective MT neurons (N = 9), but it appears that 3D selectivity may have first 
emerged in FST, pointing to a possible role for feedback in MT’s representation of 3D motion. 
 
  

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
 
Figure S4. Comparison of combined-cue and stereoscopic cue AIs with dominant and non-
dominant eye perspective cue AIs. Related to Figure 4. 
(A) Combined-cue (black points) and stereoscopic cue (magenta points; neurons with significant 
stereoscopic cue tuning only) AIs versus dominant eye perspective cue AIs for 2D (top) and 3D 
(bottom) selective MT (left) and FST (right) neurons. Direction preferences were po sitively 
associated. More opaque points indicate stronger ocular dominance (normalized for each area), 
which moderated the strength of the relationships. As expected for 2D selective neurons (top row), 
data points in the unanticipated quadrants (2 and 4) were generally associated with weak OD. 
(B) Combined-cue and stereoscopic cue AIs versus non -dominant eye perspective cue AIs. 
Direction preferences were negatively associated for 2D neurons (top) and positively associated 
for 3D neurons (bottom). As expected  for 2D selective neurons (top row), data points in the 
unanticipated quadrants (1 and 3) were generally associated with weak OD. 
 
  

===== PAGE 24 =====
 
 
Figure S5. Linear decoding of 3D motion direction from the full populations . Related to 
Figure 5. 
(A) Decoding performance with all 2D and 3D selective MT neurons as a function of motion 
coherence. Decoders were trained on the combined-cue responses and tested on the combined-
cue (black), stereoscopic cue (magenta), dominant eye perspective cue (yellow), and non -
dominant eye perspective cue (cyan) responses. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals. 
(B) Same as A, but for FST. 
 
  

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
 
Figure S6. Interocular 2D direction preference differences. Related to Figure 7. 
(A & B) Comparison of left- and right-eye 2D direction preferences in MT (A) and FST (B). Points 
are colored according to the classification in Figure 4. Dashed black lines are identity lines. 
 
  

===== PAGE 26 =====
 
Figure S7. Responses of example units from the second layer. Related to Figure 7. 
(A-F) Responses of six second-layer units to each 3D motion direction, plotted using an equal -
area Lambert projection. Yellow hues indicate higher firing rates and blue hues indicate lower 
firing rates. The units had cue -invariant 3D direction preferences. These  examples are a 
representative subset of the population, with preferences in the northern hemisphere (A: upward 
preference; B: up and to the left; C: up and to the right; D: leftward; E: rightward; F: toward). 

===== PAGE 27 =====
 
 
Figure S8. Behavioral sensitivity to 3D motion as a function of retinal speed. Related to 
STAR Methods.  
Sensitivity to combined -cue 3D motion decreased at retinal speeds higher than used in the 
experiments (~4.2°/s). 
